2014.09.09
discrete math

Set Theory
==========

A set is a structure, representing an unordered collection (group, plurality), 
of zero or more distinct objects. 

Set theory deals with operations between, relations among, and statements 
about sets. 

Basic notation
--------------

For sets use variables S, T, U...

We can denote a set S in writing by listing all its elements in curly braces: 
{a, b, c} is the set of whatever 3 objects denoted by a, b, and c.

Set builder notation: For any proposition P(x) over any universe of discourse, 
{x | P(x)} is the set of all x such that P(x).
    ex. {x | x is an integer where x > 0 and x < 5}

{b, b, b, a, c} - this set has three elements. Duplicated elements don't 
count as new elements. 

Definition of set equality
--------------------------

Two sets are equal iff they contain exactly the same elements. 

In particular, it doesn't matter how the set is defined or denoted. 

ex. the set {1, 2, 3, 4} = {x | x is an integer where x > 0 and x < 5}

Infinite sets
-------------

Conceptually, sets may be infinite. 

Symbols for some special infinite sets: 
N = {0, 1, 2, ...}                      The natural numbers
Z = {..., -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, ...}         The integers
R = the "real" numbers

Infinite sets come in different sizes.

Basic Set Relations
-------------------

* Member of
    * x e S ("x is in S") is the proposition that object x is an element or 
      member of set S. 
    * Can define set equality in terms of e relation: 
      
The empty set
-------------

ø ("null", "the empty set") is the unique set that contians no elements. 

No matter the domain of discourse, we have the axiom
    !Ex: x e ø 
    "There does not exist an x such that x is an element of the empty set."

Subset and superset relations
-----------------------------

SuT ("S is a subset of T") means that every element of S is also an 
element of T. 

if x is a member of ø then x is a member of {6, 4}
^ this is "vacuously true" (left side of implication is false)

* If S is any set, then ø is a subset of S. *

ø e {ø, 1} = true
ø is a subset of {ø, 1} = true
ø e {} = false
ø is a subset of {} = true

Sets are objects
----------------

The objects that are elements of a set may themselves be sets. 

* Note that 1 ≠ {1} ≠ {{1}} *

Cardinality and finiteness
--------------------------

|S| (read "the cardinality of S") is a measure of how many different 
elements S has. 

Ex. |ø| = 0, |{1, 2, 3}| = 3

We say S is infinite if it is not finite. 

Some infinite sets we've seen: N, Z, R

|{ø, 1}| = 2

Power sets
----------

|power set {ø, 1}| is 4 (2²)

THe power set P(s) of a set S is the set of all subsets of S. 
P(S) = {x | x u S}

Ordered n-tuples
----------------

For n e N, an ordered n-tuple or a sequence of length n is written 
a1, a2, a3, ..., an. The first element is a1.

These are like sets, except that duplicates matter, and the order makes a 
difference. 

Note (1, 2) ≠ (2, 1) ≠ (2, 1, 1). 

Empty sequence, singlets, pairs, triples, quadruples, quintuples, ... n-tuples.

Cartesian products of sets
--------------------------

For sets A, B, their Cartesian product AxB is equivalent to {(a, b) | aeA ^ beB}

Note that for finite A, B, |AxB| = |A||B|

Note that the Cartesian product is not commutative: ¬VAB: AxB = BxA

Extends to A1 x A2 x ... An

Union operator
--------------

For sets A, B, their union A ∪ B is the set containing all elements that are 
either in A, or ("v") in B (or in both).

Intersection operator
---------------------

Intersection is the set containing all elements simultaneously in A and B.


