csci2625
2014.08.26

* Memorise the Logical Equivalences table (Table 6 - p27 in book). 

(p -> q) <-> (!p v q) - contrapositive

premise = axiom

Rules of Inference: (Table 1 - p72 in book)

Modus ponens
    p
    p -> q
    qed q

Modus tollens
    !q
    p -> q
    qed !p

* Rules of inference are tautologies. 

p -> q
======  Logical equivalence
!p v q


 p -> q
========
!q -> !p


Example, page 74 in book
Determine whether the argument is valid: 

    If you send me an email, then I will finish the program.
    If you do not send me an email, then I will go to sleep.
    If I go to sleep I will awake refreshed.

    Therefore, if I do not finish the program I will awake refreshed. 

Solution:

    p = you send me an email
    q = i will finish the program
    r = i will go to sleep early
    s = i will awake feeling refreshed

    So, as our premises: 
        p -> q
        !p -> r
        r -> s

    We want to deduce:
        !q -> s

    1. p -> q       premise
    2. !p -> r      premise
    3. r -> s       premise
    4. !q -> !p     contrapositive of (1)
    5. !q -> r      hypothetical syllogism on (4) and (2)
    6. !q -> s      hypothetical syllogism on (5) and (3)

    (Note that Dr. Reed started with all premises, then added inference 
    rules - book didn't.)


Another example:

    Lynn works part time or full time.
    If Lynn does not play on the team, then she does not work part time.
    If Lynn plays on the team, she is busy.
    Lynn does not work full time. 

    Therefore, Lynn is busy.

    p = Lynn works part time
    q = Lynn works full time
    t = Lynn plays on the team
    b = Lynn is busy

    Premises: 
        p v f
        !t -> !p
        t -> b
        !f

    1. p v f        premise
    2. !t -> !p     premise
    3. t -> b       premise
    4. !f           premise
    5. p            disjunctive syllogism on (1) and (4)
    6. p -> t       contrapositive of (2)
    7. t            modus ponens on (5) and (6)
    8. b            modus ponens on (7) and (3)
