20141007
csci2625 

---

Ch 4 - Number theory
Prime numbers - useful in encryption

Divides operator: 3 | 12 (3 divides 12) 
Even division only. 

Theorem: If a | b and a | c, then a | (b + c)
(for integers a, b, c)

a | b ≡ ∃ m ∈ I such that am = b

a | c ≡ ∃ n ∈ I such that an = c

thus 

am + an = b + c
= a(m + n) = b + c
= a | (b + c)

Theorem: If a | b, then a | bc.

Theorem: a | b and b | c then a | c. 

Definition: A positive integer p is prime if the only positive factors 
of p are 1 and p. If there are other factors, it is composite, not prime. 

In other words: n is composite iff there is an a such that a | n and 1 < a < n.

Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic
---------------------------------
Every positive integer greater than 1 can be uniquely written as a prime or as 
the product of two or more primes where the prime factors are written in order 
of non-decreasing size. 

Ex: 100 = 2 * 2 * 5 * 5
    182 = 2 * 7 * 13

Composite factors: if n is a composite integer, then n has a prime divisor 
less than or equal to the square root of n. 

### Direct proof
* n is composite so it has a factor a such that 1 < a < n. 
* Thus, n = ab, where a and b are positive integers greater than 1. 
* Either a <= sqrt(n) or b <= sqrt(n). (Otherwise, ab > sqrt(n) * sqrt(n) > n).
* Thus n has a divisor <= sqrt(n). 
* This divisor is either prime or composite. 
* In either case, n has a prime factor less than sqrt(n). 

Euclid's Theorem
----------------
"There are infinitely many prime numbers." 

### Proof by contradiction
* Assume (for contradiction) there are only finite (say, n) number of primes.
* Let q = p1 * p2 * .. * pn (Product of all finite primes) and add 1. 
* q is composite because it is larger than any listed prime. 
* Hence, q has a prime factor (say, pi). 
* q - p1 * p2 * .. * pn = 1 (move product to left)
* pi | q and pi | p1 * p2 * .. * pn
* pi | 1 → contradiction

So, we conclude there are an infinite number of primes. 

Division Algorithm
------------------
Let a (dividend) be an integer and d (divisor) be a positive integer. Then 
there are unique integers q (quotient) and r (remainder), with 0 <= r < d, such 
that a = dq + r. 

Ex: a = 13, d = 4
    a / d = 3 (q), a % d = 1 (r)

    d * q + r = a
    4 * 3 + 1 = 13

Ex: a = -13, d = 4
    a / d = -4 (q), a % d = 3 (r)

    d * q + r = a
    4 * -4 + 3 = -13

    *On test.* 

Greatest Common Divisor
-----------------------
The GCD of a and b is the largest integer d such that d | a and d | b. 

Ex: Let a = (5)^2 * 7 * (17)^3
        b = (5)^2 * (6)^3 * (17)^2

    GCD of a & b? (5)^2 * (17)^2

Least Common Multiple
---------------------
Ex: a = (5)^3 * (7)^5 * (13)^0 * (17)^2
    b = 5 * (7)^12 * (13)^2 * (17)^3

    LCM = (5)^3 * (7)^12 * (13)^2 * (17)^3
    GCD = 5 * (7)^5 * (13)^0 * (17)^0
