2014.09.16
csci3720
---

Design of a relational database
===============================

Two methodologies for design of a relational db. 

1. Universal relation model
2. Entity relationship model

Universal relation model
------------------------

Assumed that the entire db is a huge relation. It is then 
decomposed into smaller relations. 

Also has one FD diagram for the db.

*Steps* 
# Identify all the semantic rules regarding your db
    "Every student has a name."
    "Every student has an ID number."

# For every semantic rule, convert it to an FD
    ## Identify the entities within the semantic rule.
        Ex. department
    ## Identify all the attributes of each entity.
        Ex. department attributes: name, location
    ## Assign a name to each attribute
        Ex. department attributes: DNAME, DLOCATION
    ## Identify the entity identifier 
        Ex. if necessary, add "phony attribute" to serve as unique 
        identifier - Create a new attribute since there is no existing 
        attribute that can uniquely id every instance of department, D#
    ## Write the FD representing the semantic rule
        Ex. D# → DNAME, DLOCATION

The way you write semantic rules must be unambiguous. If you see a word like 
"several", you don't have a functional dependency. (You might have something 
else, which will be covered later.)

Ex. Each department has several phones. 
    No FD due to multivalues. 

Ex. Each project has a name and budget.
    a. Entities: project
    b. Attributes: project name, project budget
    c. Names: PNAME, PBUDGET
    d. Identifier: Project number: P# (for this reason bla bla)
    e. FD: P# → PNAME, PBUDGET 

Ex. Each project has a founder.
    a. Entities: project, founder (read ahead)
    b. Attributes: no attributes
    c. Names: no attributes, n/a
    d. Identifier: P#, F# for founder (look ahead - this needs to be resolved)
    e. FD: P# → F#

Ex. Each project in a given department has a director.
    a. Entities: project, department, director (read ahead - #8)
    b. Attributes: no attributes
    c. Names: no attributes, n/a
    d. Identifier: P#, D# (already decided by previous rules), directorID 
        (director name may not be unique)
    e. FD: P#, D# → directorID

Ex. Each founder has a name, phone, and address.
    a. Entities: 
    b. Attributes: 
    c. Names: FNAME, FPHONE, FADD
    d. Identifier: F# (already decided for previous semantic rule)
    e. FD: F# → FNAME, FPHONE, FADD

Ex. Each founder provides for several projects
    No FD due to multivalues. 

Ex. Each director has a name and experience
    a. Entities: director
    b. Attributes: name, experience
    c. Names: DIRNAME, DIREXP
    d. Identifier: DID (already determined)
    e. FD: DID → DIRNAME, DIREXP

Ex. (mine) You are providing a constraint on attribute value. 
    No FD; provides extra information

Ex. (also mine) P#, D# → F#

# Draw the FD diagram 
    (see paper notes)

    If you find that a part of your diagram is isolated, something is 
    wrong with either your semantic rules or your interpretation of 
    your semantic rules. 

# Identify the primary key for the FD diagram
    Pick one attribute, see if you can reach all other attributes. If you 
    exhaust all attributes, then go two by two (preserve minimality).
    Primary key: D#, P#

# Reduce your FD
    Every primary key determines non-key attributes. We had a connection 
    between P# and F# and primary key and F#; the primary key was redundant 
    by definition. 

# Apply normalization
    We normalize to eliminate operational anomalies. 
    Five types of normalization: normal forms first through fifth.
    ## 1NF - A relation is in first normal form if every attribute is simple. 
        One of the properties of a relation states that attributes are simple. 
        Every relation is in 1NF by definition; every table is not.
    ## 2NF - A relation is in second normal form iff a) it is in 1NF and b) 
        every non-key attribute is fully functionally dependent on the primary 
        key. 
    ## 3NF - A relation is in third normal form iff a) it is in 2NF and b) 
        every non-key attribute is non-transitively dependent on the primary 
        key. 
    ## BCNF - A relation is in BCFM (Boyce-Codd normal form) iff every 
        determinant is a candidate key. 
    ## 4NF - determinant of non-trivial MVD is a super-key.  
    ## 5NF - 

* Next session, the first (individual) assignment will be given. Set of 
    semantic rules given, report must be written, including definitions of 
    technical terminology used. 
