20140925
csci3720

---

Fifth Normal Form
=================

Join Depednency (JD) 
--------------------
Let R be a relation whose set of attributes is U, and let x1, x2, .. xn be 
subsets of U. We say that for relation R(U) the join dependency of 
\*(x1, x2, .. xn) holds if the decomposition of R(U) into R1(x1) R2(x2) .. 
Rn(xn) has a lossless join. 

\*(...) is the symbol for join dependency. 

Two types of JD: trivial, non-trivial. 

# Trivial
If one of the subsets includes U, then the JD is trivial. A trivial JD always 
holds. 

Ex: \*({status, Sname}, {status, city}, {S#, Sname, status, city}) 

Fifth Normal Form
-----------------
A relation is in fifth normal form (aka projection/join normal form) iff every 
nontrivia JD which holds in the relation R is a consequence of the 
candidate keys of R. 

Ex. \*({S#, status}, {S#, Sname, city})
This JD has a candidate key in every subset. 

If this JD holds and each doesn't contain the candidate key, then R is not in 
5NF. 

Bottom line: make sure you have a candidate key in every decomposition. 

There are relations which always result in a lossy join, no matter how they 
are decomposed.

2-Decomposability
-----------------
Take a relation, project into two relations; when joined, always a lossy join. 

3-Decomposability
-----------------
Take the same relation, project into three relations; when joined, always a 
lossless join. 

Generally speaking, there are relations that are m-Decomposable whose join 
dependency always holds if broken into m relations. If broken into k relations 
and k < m, always a lossy join.

In practice, this is very rarely an issue. 

This concludes normalization. 

The father of relational db and dbms is Dr. Codd. He also presented 
normalization. Prior to normalization, relational db not used bc they were 
not reliable. 

There is another level of normalization, domain key normal form (DKNF). 

This is a free-standing normal form that ensures your relation is free of 
anomalies by decomposing the relation horizontally, by tuples, instead of 
vertically, by attributes. 

DKNF breaks out homogenous tuples and makes them into a relation. Problematic 
tuples are made into another relation. Horizontal decomposition instead of 
vertical decomposition. Might result in single-tuple relation, but eliminates 
operational anomalies. 

Continued data languages
------------------------
Relational data languages: (5 total) 
# Relational algebra oriented data languages (we've covered this)
# Mapping oriented data languages (includes SQL)
# Graphical oriented data languages
# Relational calculus oriented data languages
    ## Tuple oriented 
    ## Domain oriented

SQL
---
The building block of SQL is "select-from-where". 

Select clause - select <attributes> | *
Can select one attribute, list of attributes, or all attributes. 

From clause - from <relation> | <relation>,<relations>
<relation> → <relation> | <relation>,<relations>
You can use as many relations as you want. 

Where clause - <conditions>
<conditions> → <condition> | <condition> <boolean operator> <conditions>
<condition> → <attribute> <relational operator> <attribute> | 
    <attribute> <relational operator> <value> 
A set of conditions. 
ex s.sname = sp.sname or s.sname = "John"

Available relational operators available in SQL: 
[=, <>, >, <, >=, <=, Between...AND, IN, LIKE, IS NULL]

The where clause is optional; select and from are required.

IF you have more than one relation in FROM, you're doing a join. 
