2014.09.04

Instead of writing "equal join", you can write "join" alone. 

E1 = S equal join SP where S.S# = SP.S#;
E1 = S join SP where S.S# = SP.S#;

Also, just for equality, can use: 

E1 = S join SP over S#;

Example queries asked at the beginning of class: 

1. Get name & status foor suppliers who live in London. 
    A = select S where city = "London";
    B = project A over sname, status;

2. Get name of suppliers who have a shipment of part P1.
    A = S equal join SP where S.S# = SP.S#;
    B = select A where P# = "P1";
    C = project B over sname;

Join is the most expensive relational operation. Projecting and selecting 
    before doing a join results in a smaller result relation, which can be 
    more efficient. 

Continued from last class: 

    Last time discussed equi-join, natural join, theta-join. These are called 
        inner joins. 

    Inner join
        1.
        2.
        3.

    There is also a category called outer join. There are three subtypes: 
        1. left outer join
        2. right outer join
        3. full outer join

    1. left outer join
        Do a regular equal join; whatever tuples in left side of the join that 
            did not participate in the join (didn't match), add to the result 
            with null values for attributes belonging to right side. (see notes)

    2. right outer join
        Same as left outer join, but you add the tuples in the right that did 
            not participate in the join to the relation with null values for 
            attributes belonging to the left side. 

    3. full outer join
        After regular join, look for all tuples in left that didn't participate 
            and all in the right that didn't participate, and add to the 
            result relation with null values for the other operand. 

    There is also the semi-join category. 
        1. semi-join
            Whatever your result, make a projection over the attributes of 
                the first operand. Ignores attributes that aren't in the first 
                relation. 

    Division is the last operation. 
        First relation's number of attributes must be greater than the number 
            of the second relation's. The attribute in the second relation must 
            appear in the first relation. 
        Result includes all tuples of first where the attribute matches. Only 
            includes the other attributes, not the comparison. (See notes)
        If second relation's attribute has multiple values, first relation's 
            tuples must match all values. (Get matches for each, then do 
            intersection.)


We talked about eight operations: four traditional (union, subtract, intersect, 
    multiply) and four others (select, project, join, division). This isn't a 
    minimal set - you could do without join, intersect, and division. The 
    minimal set consists of union, subtract, times, select, project. 

This set was presented by Codd. Select was called restrict instead. 

When dealing with this language, always use relations as operands. Results are 
    always relations. 

If you have a system in which you can use relations, and you manipulate the 
    results as relations, the system is called a closed system. The only thing 
    you work with is relations. No numbers or other types. 
