csci3720
2014.08.26

From last time: 

Components of a DBS (database system):
    1. database
    2. hardware
    3. software
    4. users

1. database
    Data is raw material collected in reference to an event. 
    Information is processed data.
    Knowledge is information combined with a set of rules that dictate how 
        the data is to be used. 

    Databases deal with three types of data: 
        1. input data
            Anything sent to the DBS, including queries.
        2. output data
            Data returned by the DBS in reference to a query.
        3. persistent data
            Data that cannot be eliminated from the db in its entirety. 
                a. operational data
                    Data that is subjec to operations. 
                        i.  core data
                            Data about core entities of the organisation (users, 
                                accounts, students)
                        ii. associate data
                            Represents relationships among core data.
                b. decision support data
                    Data that is not stored and may change often. Ex, total 
                        number of records.

    So, a database is a collection of persistent data.

2. software
    A DBS deals with two types of software: data language, and database 
        management system (DBMS). 
            1. data language
                Creates and manipulates a db. Retrieves, deletes, updates, 
                    and inserts. (CRUD) Two forms:
                    a. sub-language
                        Support CRUD only. Can be used as an extension of a 
                            language, or as callable routines. 
                    b. full language
                        CRUD, plus control structures (if-then, loops, etc)
            2. dbms
                Software that intercepts a query issued by a user: verifies 
                    the query, if it's ok, implements the query. (Fetches and 
                    returns results.)

3. hardware
    Allows software to run.

4. users
    Three types of users:
        1. end users
            Knows nothing.
        2. application programmers
            Knows at least one data language well, can manipulate the db.
        3. db admins
            A person or a team in charge of analysing db, designing, 
                implementing. May be broken in two roles: data manager 
                and dba.
                    a. data manager
                        Designs the db, nothing more.
                    b. dba
                        Also knows hw, sw, telecom, and does maintenance. 
                        Responsibilities: 
                            i.  analysis
                            ii. implementation
                            iii security
                            iv. design
                            v.  maintenance
                            vi. data dictionary
                                This is data about data - max size, data type.

Issues related to the database include redunancy, security, integrity, 
    consistency, conflict of requirements, data independence, concurrency:
        1. redundancy
            Multiple copies of one record. 
            Some redundancy is necessary to maintain data association. 
        2. security
            a. internal
                Compartmentalising data; "inside people". Ex, financial aid 
                    doesn't get to see student grades.
            b. external
                "outside people"
        3. integrity
           "correctness" of data
        4. consistency
            Value associated with a key should be the same across the db. 
        5. conflicting requirements
            Discrepancy between users' needs. (One group needs metric, another 
                needs imperial.)
        6. data independence
            Changes in access methods and/or storage structure must not affect 
                applications. Immunity of app programs in changes like these. 
                Automatic, done by DBMS. 
        7. concurrency
            Ability of multiple users to access data at the same time.

---

2014.08.26

DBS Architecture

Three levels:
    1. external
        Represents db from viewpoint of user. 
    2. conceptual
        The db from the viewpoint of the dba. 
    3. internal
        The db from the viewpoint of the storage. 

In each level, three items to discuss: record, schema, view. 

1. external level
    a. external record
        Contains, ex, employee number and salary - fields. 
            Refer to the external schema. 
    b. external schema
        struct Employee {
            char Emp#[6];
            double salary;
        }
    c. external view
        Refers to instances of the external record. Collections of 
            actual records. 

2. conceptual level
    a. conceptual record
        The record as the dba sees it - may map to different parts of 
            external records. The records used by the dba to represent 
            the database. 
    b. conceptual schema
            Definition of a record. 
            
            Ex COBOL:
            01 EMP
                02 EMPNO PIC X (6).
                02 DEPTNO PIC X (4).
    c. conceptual view
        Instances of the conceptal record. 

3. internal 
    a. internal record
        At the internal level, computer assumes space without physical 
            limitations. Viewpoint of the storage structure regardless 
            of physical limitations. 

    b. internal schema
        Ex: 
        stored_emp length=18 bytes
            prefix type=byte(6), offset=0
            emp#   type=byte(6), offset=6, INDEX
            dept#  type=byte(4), offset=12
            pay    type=fullword, offset=16

        May be significant to dba for future expansion of db, or needed 
            due to demands of hardware. (Ex byte alignment) Location of data 
            is not included in the internal record (ex drive number).

    c. internal view
        Instances of internal record.

External to conceptual mapper - software that maps external record to 
    conceptual record. Does not change variable names, but keeps track of 
    what maps to what. 

Conceptual to internal mapper - software that maps conceptual record to 
    internal record. 

The OS is inbetween the internal level and the actual db stored on disk. OS is 
    responsible for fetching actual data. 

The DBMS oversees all levels of this system, communicating with the OS and the 
    user.

Relational DBMS does not require construction of the internal level. But, for 
    example COBOL db, does require construction of the internal level. 

Degree of relationship 
    Suppose you have an entity 'Lecturer' and another 'Course'. Suppose each 
        period is a lecturer:               and each period is a course: 
            .                                           .
            .                                           .
            .                                           .
            .                                           .
            .                                           .
    We assume that each lecturer, max, teaches one course, and each course, max, 
        is taught by one lecturer. There are some lecturers who do not teach 
        any course, and some courses that are not taught by any lecturer. 
        This is a *one-to-one* relationship. 0:1 and 1:0 are also 1-to-1.

    Suppose one lecturer can teach many courses, but each course is taught by 
        only one lecturer. This is a 1-to-many relationship. 1:n Also includes 
        1:1. Same as n:1.

    Suppose each lecturer teaches many courses, and each course is taught by 
        many lecturers. This is a many-to-many relationship. m:n

"Designing a database" means building the conceptual level. There are three 
    prominent methodologies.
        a. relational data model
            Building block is relation. Relation could be shown as a table, 
                but a table is not a relation. Data that is seen is persistent 
                core data, and relationships between the data is associate 
                data. Core and associate data are presented together simply. 
            In the data language, one retrieve statement is enough to get 
                core and associate data. As a result, instruction set for 
                relational data model is small and simple. 
            Can be learned quickly, low-cost. (HS grad + 1 week)
            Perfect for 1:1 relationship. Difficulties with 1:n. 
                Cannot handle m:n. Must break into 1:n and 1:m.

        b. hierarchical data model
            Building block is tree. 

                    Course
                    ------------
                    c# | cname
                    ============
                     |      |
            Prereq          Offering
            ------------    -------------
            c# | cname      date | loc.
            ============    =============
                              |         |
                        Faculty..      Student...

            Data language isn't as simple. Cannot be learned as quickly. 
                Oldest data model. Still used by airlines. Made by IBM. 
                Deprecated in 1980. 
            Perfect for 1:n. Difficulty with 1:1 and m:n.
            Structure is similar to human thought process.
            Also requires deep knowledge of hardware.
            (college grad + 6 mo)
            COBOL, IBM Assembly, PL1. Data language DL1.
            
        c. network data model
            Has nothing to know with networking. 
            Building block is a circular linked list (head and tail 
                connected).
            Owner and member. Ex department owns faculty ring. Faculty record 
                might own its own ring. 
            Associate data comes in different forms. Bulky data language. 
            Very long time to learn. (college grad + 1 yr)
            Overseen by COBOL committee and can only be used with COBOL.
            Great at m:n. 

---

2014.08.28

Relational Data Model

    Tuple is a row in a relation. 
    Attribute is a column in a relation. Attributes describe tuples. 

    An attribute has two parts: key (name), and value. Key is called 
        attribute type, value is called attribute value. 

    Attribute type is time-independent. Doesn't change. Value is 
        time-dependent, changes over time. 

    A tuple is a value for a tuple type. A tuple type is the table name. 
    
    In terms of mathematics, tuple means the number of elements involved in a 
        system. Here, 'tuple' refers to the entire record.

    Suppose you have a set of student names. Includes all students in the uni. 
        A record containing students in the database class is a subset of the 
        greater set. This is called the domain. Domain is set of all possible 
        values within the database. Domain of student names, domain of ages, 
        domain of addresses, etc.

    Several attributes can be extracted from a single domain. Attribute type 
        and domain name do not necessarily correspond. 

    Definitions of a relation
        Less mathematical:
            Given a collection of A1, ... An, which are subsets of D1, ... Dn, 
                (not necessarily distinct), R is a relation on those n sets if 
                it is a set of ordered n-tuples <a1, a2, ... an> such that a1 
                belongs to A1, a2 belongs to A2, and an belongs to An. Set A1 
                to An are attributes of R and sets D1, ... Dn are domains 
                of R. The value n is the degree of R.

        More mathematical:
            D1 = {a, b}
            D2 = {c, d, e}

            Cartesian product of D1 x D2:
                ac, ad, ae, bc, bc, be

            The cartesian product of attribute values can grow quite large. 
            Tuples can be found in this product. 

            * A relation is a subset of the Cartesian product of a set of 
                domains. *

    Number of tuples in a relation is the cardinality of the relation. The 
        number of attributes is the degree of the relation. 

    Properties of a relation
        1. Every attribute value is simple (atomic). Simplicity depends on 
            what you want to do with it.
        2. All entries in an attribute come from the same domain. 
        3. Order of attributes is insignificant. 
        4. Order of tuples is insignificant. 
        5. No duplicate tuples. 

        Collections that do not satisfy these conditions are not a relation, 
            but they may be a table.

    Key is an attribute or set of attributes that uniquely identify a tuple 
        in a relation by their content. Uniqueness and minimality. A key 
        is called a candidate key if it satisfies these conditions. 

    Set means one or more attributes whose values are unique for every tuple 
        in the relation. 

    If the minimality condition isn't met, the key is called a super key. A 
        super key is a set of attribute whose values are collectively unique 
        for a given tuple. 

    Among the candidate keys, one is selected to be the primary key. A primary 
        key is a selected primary key to act as the unique identifier for the 
        relation. 

    Alternate key is a candidate key not chosen to act as the primary key.

    Integrity rules are rules that deal with keys in a relation
        1. Entity integrity
            A primary key of a relation cannot be null.
        2. Referential integrity
            You can't refer to a tuple in another relation that does not 
                exist. 
            Definition: If the relation R1 includes an attribute A which is 
                a non-key attribute and A has been defined on a primary 
                domain D. At any given time, each value of A in R1 must be 
                either (a) null or (b) equal to V, say, where V is the primary 
                key value of some tuple in some relation R2 with primary key 
                defined on D. 

    Maintaining integrity
        1. Cascading
            Change one relation in other relations. Consistency.
        2. Nullification
            Make problematic value null.
        3. Restriction
            Don't allow deletion.

    Foreign key means the data for an attribute comes from the same domain as 
        a primary key in another relation. Non-key attribute.  


