20140923
csci3720
<<<<<<< HEAD

=======
>>>>>>> 7b0235f799d863f60e6a71e51dda486459f94278
---

Multivalue Dependency
=====================

* Continue ignoring multivalue dependencies in the paper assignment. Today's 
material not used in writing report.

---

x ↠ y

"x determines multivalues of y" or "y is multivalue dependent on x".

The above holds in a relation R if, whenever t and s are two tuples in R 
with t[x] = s[x], then R also contains tuples u and v where: 
# u[x] = v[x] = t[x] = s[x]
# u[y] = t[y] and u[z] = s[z]
# v[y] = s[y] and v[z] = t[z]

For all possible t and s that agree on x, this must hold - not for some, all. 
If not, no MVD. 

If there's no 'z' part, the MVD is trivial. 

MVD can be trivial or non-trivial. 

Trivial MVD conditions
----------------------
An MVD is trivial if one of these is true: 
# x ↠ U - x, where U is all attributes in relation
    ex person ↠ skill, project, part

# x ↠ A where A ⊆ X
    ex person, project ↠ person

# x ↠ ø

Non-trivial MVD simply does not meet any of the above 3 conditions. 

Fourth normal form
------------------
4NF only related to MVDs, not FDs.

Relation R is in 4NF if, whenever there is a non-trivial multivalue dependency 
x ↠ y, then x is a super-key of R. 

If you only have trivial MVDs, relation is in 4NF. 4NF only deals with non-
trivial MVDs.

FD is a special case of MVD. A set could be a single value. 

Fagin's theorem: relation R (a, b, c) is given. R is projected as R1 (a, b) and 
R2 (a, c). R1 join R2 (R1.a = R2.a) is lossless if a ↠ b and a ↠ c. 

Lossless join is a join where primary key of relations are the same?

If there's a chance you have an MVD based on semantic rules, make it trivial. 


